doc/connectivity/networking/api/wifi.rst, before:

.. _wifi_mgmt:

Wi-Fi Management
################

Overview
========

The Wi-Fi management API is used to manage Wi-Fi networks. It supports below modes:

* IEEE802.11 Station (STA)
* IEEE802.11 Access Point (AP)

Only personal mode security is supported with below types:

* Open
* WPA2-PSK
* WPA2-PSK-256
* WPA3-SAE

The Wi-Fi management API is implemented in the ``wifi_mgmt`` module as a part of the networking L2
stack.
Currently, two types of Wi-Fi drivers are supported:

* Networking or socket offloaded drivers
* Native L2 Ethernet drivers

Wi-Fi PSA crypto supported build
********************************

To enable PSA crypto API supported Wi-Fi build, the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_WIFI_NM_WPA_SUPPLICANT_CRYPTO_ALT` and the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_WIFI_NM_WPA_SUPPLICANT_CRYPTO_MBEDTLS_PSA` need to be set.

Wi-Fi Enterprise test: X.509 Certificate header generation
**********************************************************

Wi-Fi enterprise security requires use of X.509 certificates, test certificates
in PEM format are committed to the repo at :zephyr_file:`samples/net/wifi/test_certs` and the during the
build process the certificates are converted to a C header file that is included by the Wi-Fi shell
module.

.. code-block:: bash

    $ cp client.pem samples/net/wifi/test_certs/
    $ cp client-key.pem samples/net/wifi/test_certs/
    $ cp ca.pem samples/net/wifi/test_certs/
    $ cp client2.pem samples/net/wifi/test_certs/
    $ cp client-key2.pem samples/net/wifi/test_certs/
    $ cp ca2.pem samples/net/wifi/test_certs/
    $ west build -p -b <board> samples/net/wifi -- -DEXTRA_CONF_FILE=overlay-enterprise.conf

For using variable size network buffer, the following overlay file can be used:

.. code-block:: bash

    $ west build -p -b <board> samples/net/wifi -- -DEXTRA_CONF_FILE=overlay-enterprise-variable-bufs.conf



To initiate Wi-Fi connection, the following command can be used:

.. code-block:: console

    uart:~$ wifi connect -s <SSID> -c 149 -k 17 -w 2 -a client1 --key1-pwd whatever --key2-pwd whatever --eap-id1 id1 --eap-pwd1 pwd1

Server certificate is also provided in the same directory for testing purposes.
Any AAA server can be used for testing purposes, for example, ``FreeRADIUS`` or ``hostapd``.

.. note::

    The certificates are for testing purposes only and should not be used in production.
    They are generated using `FreeRADIUS raddb <https://github.com/FreeRADIUS/freeradius-server/tree/master/raddb/certs>`_ scripts.

API Reference
*************

.. doxygengroup:: wifi_mgmt

Commit message:

[nrf fromlist] net: l2: wifi: Add support for run-time certificates
Using TLS credentials library add support for run-time certificates where
the installed certs are retrieved from the credential store (as of now
only volatile backend is tested).

This helps in production environments.

Implements #79564.

Upstream PR #: 87656

Signed-off-by: Chaitanya Tata <Chaitanya.Tata@nordicsemi.no>
(cherry picked from commit f39a6c55121c1b3b4914e3e81baa4a8ad722cdba)
(cherry picked from commit 98cc44c89c18ef8a2e56a5dee96240ff7ba0b763)

doc/connectivity/networking/api/wifi.rst, after:

.. _wifi_mgmt:

Wi-Fi Management
################

Overview
========

The Wi-Fi management API is used to manage Wi-Fi networks. It supports below modes:

* IEEE802.11 Station (STA)
* IEEE802.11 Access Point (AP)

Only personal mode security is supported with below types:

* Open
* WPA2-PSK
* WPA2-PSK-256
* WPA3-SAE

The Wi-Fi management API is implemented in the ``wifi_mgmt`` module as a part of the networking L2
stack.
Currently, two types of Wi-Fi drivers are supported:

* Networking or socket offloaded drivers
* Native L2 Ethernet drivers

Wi-Fi PSA crypto supported build
********************************

To enable PSA crypto API supported Wi-Fi build, the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_WIFI_NM_WPA_SUPPLICANT_CRYPTO_ALT` and the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_WIFI_NM_WPA_SUPPLICANT_CRYPTO_MBEDTLS_PSA` need to be set.

Wi-Fi Enterprise test: X.509 Certificate management
***************************************************

Wi-Fi enterprise security requires use of X.509 certificates, two methods of installing certificates are supported:

Compile time certificates
-------------------------

Test certificates in PEM format are committed to the repo at :zephyr_file:`samples/net/wifi/test_certs` and the during the
build process the certificates are converted to a C header file that is included by the Wi-Fi shell
module.

.. code-block:: bash

    $ cp client.pem samples/net/wifi/test_certs/
    $ cp client-key.pem samples/net/wifi/test_certs/
    $ cp ca.pem samples/net/wifi/test_certs/
    $ cp client2.pem samples/net/wifi/test_certs/
    $ cp client-key2.pem samples/net/wifi/test_certs/
    $ cp ca2.pem samples/net/wifi/test_certs/
    $ west build -p -b <board> samples/net/wifi -- -DEXTRA_CONF_FILE=overlay-enterprise.conf

For using variable size network buffer, the following overlay file can be used:

.. code-block:: bash

    $ west build -p -b <board> samples/net/wifi -- -DEXTRA_CONF_FILE=overlay-enterprise-variable-bufs.conf


Run time certificates
---------------------

The Wi-Fi shell module uses TLS credentials subsystem to store and manage the certificates. The certificates can be added at runtime using the shell commands, see :ref:`tls_credentials_shell` for more details.
The sample or application need to enable the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_WIFI_SHELL_RUNTIME_CERTIFICATES` option to use this feature.


To initiate Wi-Fi connection, the following command can be used:

.. code-block:: console

    uart:~$ wifi connect -s <SSID> -c 149 -k 17 -w 2 -a client1 --key1-pwd whatever --key2-pwd whatever --eap-id1 id1 --eap-pwd1 pwd1

Server certificate is also provided in the same directory for testing purposes.
Any AAA server can be used for testing purposes, for example, ``FreeRADIUS`` or ``hostapd``.

.. note::

    The certificates are for testing purposes only and should not be used in production.
    They are generated using `FreeRADIUS raddb <https://github.com/FreeRADIUS/freeradius-server/tree/master/raddb/certs>`_ scripts.

API Reference
*************

.. doxygengroup:: wifi_mgmt
