samples/net/sockets/echo_async/README.rst, before:

.. zephyr:code-sample:: async-sockets-echo
   :name: Asynchronous echo server using poll()
   :relevant-api: bsd_sockets

   Implement an asynchronous IPv4/IPv6 TCP echo server using BSD sockets and poll()

Overview
********

The sockets/echo-async sample application for Zephyr implements an
asynchronous IPv4/IPv6 TCP echo server using a BSD Sockets compatible API
with non-blocking sockets and a ``poll()`` call. This is an extension of
the :zephyr:code-sample:`sockets-echo` sample. It's a more involved application,
supporting both IPv4 and IPv6 with concurrent connections, limiting
maximum number of simultaneous connections, and basic error handling.

The source code for this sample application can be found at:
:zephyr_file:`samples/net/sockets/echo_async`.

Requirements
************

- :ref:`networking_with_host`
- or, a board with hardware networking (including 6LoWPAN)

Building and Running
********************

Build the Zephyr version of the sockets/echo_async application like this:

.. zephyr-app-commands::
   :zephyr-app: samples/net/sockets/echo_async
   :board: <board_to_use>
   :goals: build
   :compact:

After the sample starts, it expects connections at 192.0.2.1 (IPv4), or
2001:db8::1 (IPv6), port 4242. The easiest way to connect is:

.. code-block:: console

    $ telnet 192.0.2.1 4242     # use this for IPv4
    $ telnet 2001:db8::1 4242   # or this for IPv6

After a connection is made, the application will echo back any line sent to
it. Unlike the above-mentioned :zephyr:code-sample:`sockets-echo` sample, this application
supports multiple concurrent client connections. You can open
another terminal window and run the same telnet command as above.
The sample supports up to three connected clients, but this can be adjusted
by changing ``NUM_FDS`` defined in the source code.

Running application on POSIX Host
=================================

The same application source code can be built for a POSIX system, e.g.
Linux. (Note: if you look at the source, you will see that the code is
the same except the header files are different for Zephyr vs POSIX, and
there's an additional option to set for Linux to make a socket IPv6-only).

To build:

.. code-block:: console

    $ make -f Makefile.host

To run:

.. code-block:: console

    $ ./socket_echo

To test:

.. code-block:: console

    $ telnet 127.0.0.1 4242   # use this for IPv4
    $ telnet ::1 4242         # or this for IPv6

As can be seen, the behavior of the application is the same as the Zephyr
version.

Commit message:

[nrf fromtree] samples: net: Add Wi-Fi snippet support for networking samples
Make use of wifi-ipv4 snippet in several networking samples.

Signed-off-by: Robert Lubos <robert.lubos@nordicsemi.no>
(cherry picked from commit fd2fa54aa755a5c0f3d8b7a2075d804f325ed6ea)
(cherry picked from commit c257a1f808aac48da91152c94116998887c5c648)
(cherry picked from commit 9b684667d7c98c9f2b507564bfdd6141d9b437b3)

samples/net/sockets/echo_async/README.rst, after:

.. zephyr:code-sample:: async-sockets-echo
   :name: Asynchronous echo server using poll()
   :relevant-api: bsd_sockets

   Implement an asynchronous IPv4/IPv6 TCP echo server using BSD sockets and poll()

Overview
********

The sockets/echo-async sample application for Zephyr implements an
asynchronous IPv4/IPv6 TCP echo server using a BSD Sockets compatible API
with non-blocking sockets and a ``poll()`` call. This is an extension of
the :zephyr:code-sample:`sockets-echo` sample. It's a more involved application,
supporting both IPv4 and IPv6 with concurrent connections, limiting
maximum number of simultaneous connections, and basic error handling.

The source code for this sample application can be found at:
:zephyr_file:`samples/net/sockets/echo_async`.

Requirements
************

- :ref:`networking_with_host`
- or, a board with hardware networking (including 6LoWPAN)

Building and Running
********************

Build the Zephyr version of the sockets/echo_async application like this:

.. zephyr-app-commands::
   :zephyr-app: samples/net/sockets/echo_async
   :board: <board_to_use>
   :goals: build
   :compact:

After the sample starts, it expects connections at 192.0.2.1 (IPv4), or
2001:db8::1 (IPv6), port 4242. The easiest way to connect is:

.. code-block:: console

    $ telnet 192.0.2.1 4242     # use this for IPv4
    $ telnet 2001:db8::1 4242   # or this for IPv6

After a connection is made, the application will echo back any line sent to
it. Unlike the above-mentioned :zephyr:code-sample:`sockets-echo` sample, this application
supports multiple concurrent client connections. You can open
another terminal window and run the same telnet command as above.
The sample supports up to three connected clients, but this can be adjusted
by changing ``NUM_FDS`` defined in the source code.

Wi-Fi
=====

The IPv4 Wi-Fi support can be enabled in the sample with
:ref:`Wi-Fi snippet <snippet-wifi-ipv4>`.

Running application on POSIX Host
=================================

The same application source code can be built for a POSIX system, e.g.
Linux. (Note: if you look at the source, you will see that the code is
the same except the header files are different for Zephyr vs POSIX, and
there's an additional option to set for Linux to make a socket IPv6-only).

To build:

.. code-block:: console

    $ make -f Makefile.host

To run:

.. code-block:: console

    $ ./socket_echo

To test:

.. code-block:: console

    $ telnet 127.0.0.1 4242   # use this for IPv4
    $ telnet ::1 4242         # or this for IPv6

As can be seen, the behavior of the application is the same as the Zephyr
version.
