samples/shields/npm6001_ek/doc/index.rst, before:

.. _npm6001_ek_sample:

nPM6001 EK sample
#################

Overview
********

This sample is provided as an example to test the :ref:`npm6001_ek`. The sample
provides a shell interface that allows to test multiple functionalities offered
by the nPM6001 PMIC, including:

- Regulators (BUCK0/1/2/3 and LDO0/1)
- GPIO
- Watchdog

Requirements
************

The shield needs to be wired to a host board supporting the Arduino connector.
Below you can find a wiring example for the nRF52840 DK:

.. figure:: nrf52840dk_wiring.jpg
   :alt: nRF52840DK + nPM6001-EK wiring example
   :align: center

   nRF52840DK + nPM6001-EK wiring example

Building and Running
********************

The sample is designed so that it can run on any platform. For example, when
building for the nRF52840 DK, the following command can be used:

.. zephyr-app-commands::
   :zephyr-app: samples/shields/npm6001_ek
   :board: nrf52840dk/nrf52840
   :goals: build
   :compact:

Note that this sample automatically sets ``SHIELD`` to ``npm6001_ek``. Once
flashed, you should boot into the shell interface. The ``npm6001`` command is
provided to test the PMIC. Below you can find details for each subcommand.

Regulators
==========

The ``npm6001`` shell interface provides the ``regulator`` subcommand to test
the regulators embedded in the PMIC (BUCK0/1/2/3 and LDO0/1). Below you can
find some command examples.

.. code-block:: bash

   # list all the available regulators
   npm6001 regulator list
   BUCK0
   BUCK1
   BUCK2
   BUCK3
   LDO0
   LDO1

.. code-block:: bash

   # list all the supported voltages by BUCK2
   npm6001 regulator voltages BUCK2
   1200 mV
   1250 mV
   1300 mV
   1350 mV
   1400 mV

.. code-block:: bash

   # enable BUCK3
   npm6001 regulator enable BUCK3
   # disable BUCK3
   npm6001 regulator disable BUCK3

.. code-block:: bash

   # set BUCK3 voltage to exactly 3000 mV
   npm6001 regulator set BUCK3 3000
   # obtain the actual BUCK3 configured voltage
   npm6001 regulator get BUCK3
   3000 mV
   # set BUCK0 voltage to a value between 2350 mV and 2450 mV
   npm6001 regulator set BUCK0 2350 2450
   # obtain the actual BUCK0 configured voltage
   npm6001 regulator get BUCK3
   2400 mV

.. code-block:: bash

   # set BUCK0 to hysteretic mode
   npm6001 regulator modeset BUCK0 hys
   # set BUCK0 to PWM mode
   npm6001 regulator modeset BUCK0 pwm

.. code-block:: bash

   # get BUCK0 mode
   npm6001 regulator modeget BUCK0
   Hysteretic

.. code-block:: bash

   # get active errors on BUCK0
   npm6001 regulator errors BUCK0
   Overcurrent:    [ ]
   Overtemp.:      [ ]

GPIO
====

The ``npm6001`` shell interface provides the ``gpio`` subcommand to test the
GPIO functionality offered by the PMIC. Below you can find some command
examples.

.. code-block:: bash

   # configure GPIO 0 as output
   npm6001 gpio configure -p 0 -d out
   # configure GPIO 0 as output (init high)
   npm6001 gpio configure -p 0 -d outh
   # configure GPIO 0 as output (init low)
   npm6001 gpio configure -p 0 -d outl
   # configure GPIO 0 as output with high-drive mode enabled
   npm6001 gpio configure -p 0 -d out --high-drive
   # configure GPIO 1 as input
   npm6001 gpio configure -p 1 -d input
   # configure GPIO 1 as input with pull-down enabled
   npm6001 gpio configure -p 1 -d input --pull-down
   # configure GPIO 1 as input with CMOS mode enabled
   npm6001 gpio configure -p 1 -d input --cmos

.. code-block:: bash

   # get GPIO 1 level
   npm6001 gpio get 1

.. code-block:: bash

   # set GPIO 0 high
   npm6001 gpio set 0 1
   # set GPIO 0 low
   npm6001 gpio set 0 0

.. code-block:: bash

   # toggle GPIO 0
   npm6001 gpio toggle 0

Watchdog
========

The ``npm6001`` shell interface provides the ``wdt`` subcommand to test the
Watchdog functionality offered by the PMIC. Below you can find some command
examples.

.. code-block:: bash

   # enable watchdog, timeout set to 8 seconds. Timeout will be rounded up to
   # the resolution of the watchdog, e.g. 10s -> 12s.
   npm6001 wdt enable 8000
   # disable watchdog
   npm6001 wdt disable
   # kick/feed watchdog
   npm6001 wdt kick

.. note::
   When the watchdog reset pin is connected to your board reset, you will see
   how Zephyr reboots after the watchdog timeout expires.

Commit message:

[nrf fromtree] doc: samples: Adopt code-sample-category across tree
This commit uses the new .. zephyr:code-sample-category directive to
categorize code samples across the tree.
Updates existing legacy references to manually defined targets to now
use :zephyr:code-sample-category: role instead.

Signed-off-by: Benjamin Cabé <benjamin@zephyrproject.org>
(cherry picked from commit 1db9b009a70e92cb75ef2e403f06a7a5bff022ef)

Signed-off-by: Sean Madigan <sean.madigan@nordicsemi.no>
(cherry picked from commit a4c6ee644edb6847e94515ad3292c9ccc00233fc)

samples/shields/npm6001_ek/doc/index.rst, after:

.. zephyr:code-sample:: npm6001_ek
   :name: nPM6001 EK

   Interact with the nPM6001 PMIC using the shell interface.

Overview
********

This sample is provided as an example to test the :ref:`npm6001_ek`. The sample
provides a shell interface that allows to test multiple functionalities offered
by the nPM6001 PMIC, including:

- Regulators (BUCK0/1/2/3 and LDO0/1)
- GPIO
- Watchdog

Requirements
************

The shield needs to be wired to a host board supporting the Arduino connector.
Below you can find a wiring example for the nRF52840 DK:

.. figure:: nrf52840dk_wiring.jpg
   :alt: nRF52840DK + nPM6001-EK wiring example
   :align: center

   nRF52840DK + nPM6001-EK wiring example

Building and Running
********************

The sample is designed so that it can run on any platform. For example, when
building for the nRF52840 DK, the following command can be used:

.. zephyr-app-commands::
   :zephyr-app: samples/shields/npm6001_ek
   :board: nrf52840dk/nrf52840
   :goals: build
   :compact:

Note that this sample automatically sets ``SHIELD`` to ``npm6001_ek``. Once
flashed, you should boot into the shell interface. The ``npm6001`` command is
provided to test the PMIC. Below you can find details for each subcommand.

Regulators
==========

The ``npm6001`` shell interface provides the ``regulator`` subcommand to test
the regulators embedded in the PMIC (BUCK0/1/2/3 and LDO0/1). Below you can
find some command examples.

.. code-block:: bash

   # list all the available regulators
   npm6001 regulator list
   BUCK0
   BUCK1
   BUCK2
   BUCK3
   LDO0
   LDO1

.. code-block:: bash

   # list all the supported voltages by BUCK2
   npm6001 regulator voltages BUCK2
   1200 mV
   1250 mV
   1300 mV
   1350 mV
   1400 mV

.. code-block:: bash

   # enable BUCK3
   npm6001 regulator enable BUCK3
   # disable BUCK3
   npm6001 regulator disable BUCK3

.. code-block:: bash

   # set BUCK3 voltage to exactly 3000 mV
   npm6001 regulator set BUCK3 3000
   # obtain the actual BUCK3 configured voltage
   npm6001 regulator get BUCK3
   3000 mV
   # set BUCK0 voltage to a value between 2350 mV and 2450 mV
   npm6001 regulator set BUCK0 2350 2450
   # obtain the actual BUCK0 configured voltage
   npm6001 regulator get BUCK3
   2400 mV

.. code-block:: bash

   # set BUCK0 to hysteretic mode
   npm6001 regulator modeset BUCK0 hys
   # set BUCK0 to PWM mode
   npm6001 regulator modeset BUCK0 pwm

.. code-block:: bash

   # get BUCK0 mode
   npm6001 regulator modeget BUCK0
   Hysteretic

.. code-block:: bash

   # get active errors on BUCK0
   npm6001 regulator errors BUCK0
   Overcurrent:    [ ]
   Overtemp.:      [ ]

GPIO
====

The ``npm6001`` shell interface provides the ``gpio`` subcommand to test the
GPIO functionality offered by the PMIC. Below you can find some command
examples.

.. code-block:: bash

   # configure GPIO 0 as output
   npm6001 gpio configure -p 0 -d out
   # configure GPIO 0 as output (init high)
   npm6001 gpio configure -p 0 -d outh
   # configure GPIO 0 as output (init low)
   npm6001 gpio configure -p 0 -d outl
   # configure GPIO 0 as output with high-drive mode enabled
   npm6001 gpio configure -p 0 -d out --high-drive
   # configure GPIO 1 as input
   npm6001 gpio configure -p 1 -d input
   # configure GPIO 1 as input with pull-down enabled
   npm6001 gpio configure -p 1 -d input --pull-down
   # configure GPIO 1 as input with CMOS mode enabled
   npm6001 gpio configure -p 1 -d input --cmos

.. code-block:: bash

   # get GPIO 1 level
   npm6001 gpio get 1

.. code-block:: bash

   # set GPIO 0 high
   npm6001 gpio set 0 1
   # set GPIO 0 low
   npm6001 gpio set 0 0

.. code-block:: bash

   # toggle GPIO 0
   npm6001 gpio toggle 0

Watchdog
========

The ``npm6001`` shell interface provides the ``wdt`` subcommand to test the
Watchdog functionality offered by the PMIC. Below you can find some command
examples.

.. code-block:: bash

   # enable watchdog, timeout set to 8 seconds. Timeout will be rounded up to
   # the resolution of the watchdog, e.g. 10s -> 12s.
   npm6001 wdt enable 8000
   # disable watchdog
   npm6001 wdt disable
   # kick/feed watchdog
   npm6001 wdt kick

.. note::
   When the watchdog reset pin is connected to your board reset, you will see
   how Zephyr reboots after the watchdog timeout expires.
